---
title: "Perintä"
nav_order: 91
hidden: false
---

Luokkia käytetään selkeyttämään olio-ohjelmoinnin ongelmakentän konsepteja. Jokainen ljomalle luokka lisää ohjelmointikieleen uutta toiminnallisuutta. Tämä toiminnallisuus on tarpeen, jotta voimme ratkaista kohtaamiamme ongelmia. Olennaista oliopohjaisessa ohjelmoinnissa on, että **ratkaisut syntyvät olioiden välisestä vuorovaikutuksesta, jotka luodaan luokista**. Olio-ohjelmoinnissa olio on itsenäinen yksikkö, jolla on tila, jota voidaan muuttaa käyttämällä oliolle tarjottuja metodeja. Oliot toimivat yhteistyössä, ja jokaisella on oma vastuualueensa.

Jokainen luokka C#:ssa laajentaa luokkaa **Object**, mikä tarkoittaa, että jokaisella luokalla on käytössään kaikki **Object**-luokassa määritellyt metodit. Jos haluamme muuttaa, miten **Object**-luokassa määritellyt metodit toimivat, ne täytyy ylikirjoittaa määrittelemällä uusi toteutus niille luokassa, jota olemme luomassa. Luomamme oliot saavat metodit **Equals** ja **GetHashCode** muiden joukossa **Object**-luokasta.

Jokainen luokkaa perii luokan **Object**, mutta on mahdollista periä myös muita luokkia. Jos tutkimme C#:n [**Int32**](https://learn.microsoft.com/en-us/dotnet/api/system.int32?view=net-6.0) (eli kokonaisluku) -luokan API:a (eli Application Programming Interface, ohjelmointirajapinta), huomaamme, että **Int32**:lla on **ValueType**-niminen **yliluokka**. **ValueType**:lla on puolestaan **Object**-luokka yliluokkanaan.


```console
Inheritance
Object --> ValueType --> Int32
```

Jokainen luokka voi suoraan laajentaa vain yhtä luokkaa. Välillisesti luokka kuitenkin perii kaiken mitä peritty luokka laajentaa. Täten esimerkin **Int32**-luokalla on käytössään **ValueType**- ja **Object**-luokkien muuttujat ja metodit.

Käytämme **:** (eli kaksoispistettä) merkitsemään luokan perintää. Luokka, joka saa perityt ominaisuudet, on **johdettu luokka** ja luokka, jonka ominaisuudet peritään, on **yliluokka**.

Tarkastellaan luokkaa autojen valmistusjärjestelmässä, joka hallinnoi auton osia. Osien hallinnan peruskomponentti on luokka **Part**, joka määrittelee tunnisteen, valmistajan ja kuvauksen.


```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  public class Part
  {

    public string identifier { get; }
    public string manufacturer { get; }
    public string description { get; }

    public Part(string identifier, string manufacturer, string description)
    {
      this.identifier = identifier;
      this.manufacturer = manufacturer;
      this.description = description;
    }
  }
}
```

Yksi auton osa on moottori. Kuten kaikki osat, myös moottorilla on valmistaja, tunniste ja kuvaus. Lisäksi jokaisella moottorilla on tyyppi, kuten polttomoottori, sähkömoottori tai hybridimoottori.

Perinteinen tapa toteuttaa luokka **Engine** ilman perintää olisi seuraava.


```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  public class Engine
  {
    public string engineType { get; }
    public string identifier { get; }
    public string manufacturer { get; }
    public string description { get; }

    public Engine(string engineType, string identifier, string manufacturer, string description)
    {
      this.engineType = engineType;
      this.identifier = identifier;
      this.manufacturer = manufacturer;
      this.description = description;
    }
  }
}
```

Huomaamme merkittävän määrän päällekkäisyyttä **Engine**- ja **Part**-luokkien välillä. Voimme sanoa, että **Engine** on erikoistapaus **Part**-luokasta. Moottori on osa, mutta sillä on myös ominaisuuksia, joita osalla ei ole, kuten moottorin tyyppi.

Luodaan uudelleen **Engine**-luokka ja käytetään tällä kertaa perintää toteutuksessa. Luomme luokan **Engine**, joka perii luokan **Part**: moottori on erikoistapaus osasta.


```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  public class Engine : Part
  {
    public string engineType { get; }

    public Engine(string engineType, string identifier, string manufacturer, string description) : 
      base(identifier, manufacturer, description)
    {
      this.engineType = engineType;
    }
  }
}
```

Luokan määrittely **public class Engine : Part** tarkoittaa, että luokka **Engine** perii luokan **Part** ominaisuudet. Määrittelemme myös luokassa **Engine** muuttujan **engineType**.

Luokan **Engine** konstruktori on mielenkiintoinen. Sen määrittelyrivillä käytämme avainsanaa **base** kutsuaksemme yliluokan konstruktoria. Kutsu **base(identifier, manufacturer, description)** kutsuu konstruktoria **public Part(string identifier, string manufacturer, string description)**, joka on määritelty luokassa **Part**. Tämän kautta yliluokan muuttujat alustetaan niiden alkuperäisillä arvoilla. **base**-kutsun jälkeen **Engine**-konstruktorin koodilohkossa asetamme muuttujalle **engineType** oikean arvon.


<Note>
Yliluokan base -kutsu muistuttaa hieman konstruktorin this -kutsua (eli kun ylikirjoitetaan konstruktoria); tällä kutsutaan tämän luokan konstruktoria, kun taas base -kutsulla kutsutaan yliluokan konstruktoria. Jos konstruktori käyttää yliluokan konstruktoria, eli base -kutsua, täytyy base -kutsu olla konstruktorin määrittelyrivillä. Tämä on samankaltainen tilanne kuin this -kutsun kanssa (täytyy myös olla konstruktorin määrittelyrivillä).
</Note>

Koska luokka Engline laajentaa luokkaa Part, sillä on käytössään kaikki luokan Part tarjoamat metodit. Voimme luoda luokan Engine instansseja samalla tavalla kuin mitä tahansa muita luokkia.


```cpp
static void Main(string[] args)
{
  Engine engine = new Engine("combustion", "hz", "volkswagen", "VW GOLF 1L 86-91");
  Console.WriteLine(engine.engineType);
  Console.WriteLine(engine.identifier);
  Console.WriteLine(engine.manufacturer);
  Console.WriteLine(engine.description);
}
```

```console
combustion
hz
volkswagen
VW GOLF 1L 86-91
```

Kuten näemme, luokka **Engine** sisältää kaikki **Part**-luokan muuttujat. 

## Suojausmääreet private, protected ja public

Private members are visible only in derived classes that are nested in their base class. Otherwise, they are not visible in derived classes. So, from the Engine class there would be no way to directly access the variables identifier, manufacturer, and description,if they were defined private in the base class Part. Now they are public, and as such usable from the derived class.

<Note> We have not defined set for our variables in Part. This means, that the derived class Engine cannot set the values for the variables, only get them. </Note>

A derived class sees everything that is defined with the **public** modifier in the base class. IF we want to define some variables or methods that are visible to the derived classes but invisible to everything else, we can use the access modifier **protected** to achieve this.

## Calling the constructor of the base class

You use the keyword **base** to call the constructor of the base class. The call receives as parameters the types of values that the base class constructor requires. If there are multiple constructors in the base class, the parameters of the base call dictate which of them is used.

When the constructor (of the derived class) is called, the variables defined in the base class are initialized. The events that occur during the constructor call are practically identical to what happens with a normal constructor call. If the base class doesn't provide a non-parameterized constructor, there must always be an explicit call to the constructor of the base class in the constructors of the derived class.

We demonstrate in the example below how to call **this** and **base**. The class **Baseclass** includes an object variable and two constructors. One of them calls the other constructor with the **this** keyword. The class DerivedClass includes a parameterized constructor, but it has no object variables. The constructor of DerivedClass calls the parameterized constructor of the base class.

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  public class BaseClass
  {
    private string objectVariable;

    public BaseClass() : this("Example")
    {
    }

    public BaseClass(string value)
    {
      this.objectVariable = value;
    }

    public override string ToString()
    {
      return this.objectVariable;
    }
  }
}
```

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  public class DerivedClass : BaseClass
  {
    public DerivedClass() : base("Derived Class")
    {
    }
  }
}
```

```cpp
BaseClass bas = new BaseClass();
DerivedClass der = new DerivedClass();

Console.WriteLine(bas);
Console.WriteLine(der);
```

```console
Example
Derived Class
```

## Calling a base class method

You can call the methods defined in the base class by prefixing the call with base, just as you can call the methods defined in this class by prefixing the call with this. For example, when overriding the ToString method, you can call the base class's definition of that method in the following manner:

```cpp
public override string ToString()
{
  return "override: " + base.ToString();
}
```

This would make our previous example print look like this: 

```console
Example
override: Derived Class
```

## The actual type of an object dictates which method is executed

An object's type decides what the methods provided by the object are. Let's create a couple of examples for this.

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  public class Person
  {
    public string name { get; set; }
    public string address { get; set; }

    public Person(string name, string address)
    {
      this.name = name;
      this.address = address;
    }

    public override string ToString()
    {
      return this.name + ", " + this.address;
    }
  }
}
```

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  public class Student : Person
  {
    public int credits { get; set; }
    public Student(string name, string address) : base(name, address)
    {
      this.credits = 0;
    }

    public void Study()
    {
      this.credits++;
    }
  }
}
```
 If a reference to a **Student** type object is stored in a **Person type variable**, only the methods defined in the Person class (and its base class and interfaces) are available:

```cpp
Person ollie = new Student("Ollie", "6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028");

Console.WriteLine(ollie.credits);       // DOESN'T WORK!
ollie.Study();              // DOESN'T WORK!
Console.WriteLine(ollie);   // ollie.ToString() WORKS
```

We get an error for the first two calls to **ollie**.

So an object has at its disposal the methods that relate to its type, and also to its base classes and interfaces. The Student object above offers the methods defined in the the classes Person and Object.

Let's give the Student their own ToString:

```cpp
public override string ToString()
{
  return base.ToString() + " credits: " + this.credits;
}
```

The class Person had already overriden the ToString method it inherited from the class Object, and now we override the ToString from the Person class. If we handle an object by some other type than its actual type, which version of the object's method is called?

In the following example, we'll have students that we refer to by variables of different types. Which version of the ToString method will be executed: the one defined in Objecct, Person, or Student?


```cpp
Student ollie = new Student("Ollie", "6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028");
Console.WriteLine(ollie);
Person olliePerson = new Student("Ollie", "6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028");
Console.WriteLine(olliePerson);
Object ollieObject = new Student("Ollie", "6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028");
Console.WriteLine(ollieObject);

Object alice = new Student("Alice", "177 Stewart Ave. Farmington, ME 04938");
Console.WriteLine(alice);
```

```console
Ollie, 6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028 credits: 0
Ollie, 6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028 credits: 0
Ollie, 6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028 credits: 0
Alice, 177 Stewart Ave. Farmington, ME 04938 credits: 0
```

The method to be executed is chosen based on the actual type of the object, which means the class whose constructor is called when the object is created. If the method has no definition in that class, the version of the method is chosen from the class that is closest to the actual type in the inheritance hierarchy.

Regardless of the type of the variable, the method that is executed is always chosen based on the actual type of the object. Objects are polymorphic, which means that they can be used via many different variable types. The executed method always relates to the actual type of the object. This phenomenon is called polymorphism.

Let's examine polymorphism with another example.

You could represent a point in two-dimensional coordinate system with the following class:

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  using System;
  public class Point
  {

    private int x;
    private int y;

    public Point(int x, int y)
    {
      this.x = x;
      this.y = y;
    }

    public int ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin()
    {
      return Math.Abs(x) + Math.Abs(y);
    }

    protected string Location()
    {
      return x + ", " + y;
    }

    public override string ToString()
    {
      return "(" + this.Location() + ") distance " + this.ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin();
    }
  }
}
```

The **Location** method is not meant for external use, which is why it is defined as protected. Derived classes will still be able to access the method. [**Manhattan distance**](http://en.wiktionary.org/wiki/Manhattan_distance) means the distance between two points if you can only travel in the direction of the coordinate axes. It is used in many navigation algorithms, for example.

A colored point is otherwise identical to a point, but it contains also a color that expressed as a string. Due to the similarity, we can create a new class by extending the class Point.

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  public class ColorPoint : Point
  {

    private string color;

    public ColorPoint(int x, int y, string color) : base(x, y)
    {
      this.color = color;
    }

    public override string ToString()
    {
      return base.ToString() + " color: " + color;
    }
  }
}
```

The class defines an object variable in which we store the color. The coordinates are already defined in the base class. We want the string representation to be the same as with points, but to also include information about the color. The overriden ToString method calls the ToString method of the base class, and adds to it the color of the point.

Next we'll add a few points to a list. Some of them are "normal" while others are color points. At the end of the example we'll print the points on the list. For each point, the ToString to be executed is determined by the actual type of the point, even though the list knows all the points by the Point type.

```cpp
static void Main(string[] args)
{
  List<Point> points = new List<Point>();
  points.Add(new Point(4, 8));
  points.Add(new ColorPoint(1, 1, "green"));
  points.Add(new ColorPoint(2, 5, "blue"));
  points.Add(new Point(0, 0));

  foreach (Point p in points)
  {
    Console.WriteLine(p);
  }
}
```

```console
(4, 8) distance 12
(1, 1) distance 2 color: green
(2, 5) distance 7 color: blue
(0, 0) distance 0
```

We also want to include a three-dimensional point in our program. Since it has no color information, let's derive it from the class **Point**.

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  using System;
  public class Point3D : Point
  {

    private int z;

    public Point3D(int x, int y, int z) : base(x, y)
    {
      this.z = z;
    }
    new protected string Location()
    {
      return base.Location() + ", " + z;    // the resulting string has the form "x, y, z"
    }
    new public int ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin()
    {
      // first ask the base for the distance based on x and y
      // and add the effect of the z coordinate to that result
      return base.ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin() + Math.Abs(z);
    }

    public override string ToString()
    {
      return "(" + this.Location() + ") distance " + this.ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin();
    }
  }
}
```

<Note> In our methods Location and ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin we use the keyword new, because we are overriding the methods from the base class. Without the keyword, we would get a warning. </Note>

```cpp
static void Main(string[] args)
{
  List<Point> points = new List<Point>();
  points.Add(new Point(4, 8));
  points.Add(new ColorPoint(1, 1, "green"));
  points.Add(new ColorPoint(2, 5, "blue"));
  points.Add(new Point3D(5, 2, 8));
  points.Add(new Point(0, 0));

  foreach (Point p in points)
  {
    Console.WriteLine(p);
  }
}
```

```console
(4, 8) distance 12
(1, 1) distance 2 color: green
(2, 5) distance 7 color: blue
(5, 2, 8) distance 15
(0, 0) distance 0
```

We notice that the **ToString** method in **Point3D** is exactly the same as the ToString of **Point**. Could we save some effort and not override ToString? The answer happens to be yes! The Point3D class is refined into this:

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  using System;
  public class Point3D : Point
  {

    private int z;

    public Point3D(int x, int y, int z) : base(x, y)
    {
      this.z = z;
    }
    new protected string Location()
    {
      return base.Location() + ", " + z;    // the resulting string has the form "x, y, z"
    }
    new public int ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin()
    {
      return base.ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin() + Math.Abs(z);
    }
  }
}
```

What happens in detail when we call the ToString method of a three-dimensional point? The execution advances in the following manner.

1. Look for a definition of ToString in the class Point3D. It does not exist, so the base class is next to be examined.
2. Look for a definition of ToString in the base class point. It can be found, so the code inside the implementation of the method is executed
  * so the exact code to be executed is **return "("+this.Location()+") distance " + this.ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin();**
  * the method Location is executed first
  * look for a definition of Location in the class Point3D. It can be found, so its code is executed.
  * This location calls the Location of the base class to calculate the result
  * next we look for a definition of **ManhattanDistanceFromOrigin** in the Point3D class. It's found and its code is then executed
  * Again, the method calls the similarly named method of the base class during its execution


As we can see, the sequence of events caused by the method call has multiple steps. The principle, however, is clear: The definition for the method is first searched for in the class definition of the actual type of the object. If it is not found, we next examine the base class. If the definition cannot be found there, either, we move on to the base class of this base class, etc...

## When is inheritance worth using?

Inheritance is a tool for building and specializing hierarchies of concepts; a derived class is always a special case of the base class. If the class to be created is a special case of an existing class, this new class could be created by extending the existing class. For example, in the previously discussed car part scenario an engine is a part, but an engine has extra functionality that not all parts have.

When inheriting, the derived class receives the functionality of the base class. If the derived class doesn't need or use some of the inherited functionality, inheritance is not justifiable. Classes that inherit will inherit all the methods and interfaces from the base class, so the derived class can be used in place of the base class wherever the base class is used. It's a good idea to keep the inheritance hierarchy shallow, since maintaining and further developing the hierarchy becomes more difficult as it grows larger. Generally speaking, if your inheritance hierarchy is more than 2 or 3 levels deep, the structure of the program could probably be improved.

Inheritance is not useful in every scenario. For instance, extending the class Car with the class Part (or Engine) would be incorrect. A car includes an engine and parts, but an engine or a part is not a car. More generally, if an object owns or is composed of other objects, inheritance should not be used.

When using inheritance, you should take care to ensure that the [**Single Responsibility Principle**](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Single_responsibility_principle) holds true. There should only be one reason for each class to change. If you notice that inheriting adds more responsibilities to a class, you should form multiple classes of the class.

### Example of misusing inheritance

Let's consider a postal service and some related classes. **Customer** includes the information related to a customer, and the class **Order** that inherits from the Customer class and includes the information about the ordered item. The class Order also has a method called **PostalAddress** which represents the postal address that the order is shipped to.

```cpp
public class Customer
{
  public string name { get; set; }
  public string address { get; set; }

  public Customer(string name, string address)
  {
    this.name = name;
    this.address = address;
  }
}
``` 

```cpp
public class Order : Customer
{

  private string product;
  private string count;

  public Order(string product, string count, string name, string address) : base(name, address)
  {
    this.product = product;
    this.count = count;
  }

  public string PostalAddress()
  {
    return this.name + "\n" + this.address;
  }
}
```

Above inheritance is not used correctly. When inheriting, the derived class must be a special case of the base class; an order is definitely not a special case of a customer. The misuse shows itself in how the code breaks the single responsibility principle: the Order class is responsible both for maintaining the customer information and the order information.

The problem becomes very clear when we think of what a change in a customer's address would cause.

In the case that an address changes, we would have to change every order object that relates to that customer. This is hardly ideal. A better solution would be to encapsulate the customer as an object variable of the Order class. Thinking more closely on the semantics of an order, this seems intuitive. An order has a customer.

Let's modify the Order class so that it includes a reference to a Customer object.

```cpp
public class Order
{

  private Customer customer;
  private string product;
  private string count;

  public Order(Customer customer, string product, string count)
  {
    this.customer = customer;
    this.product = product;
    this.count = count;
  }

  public string PostalAddress()
  {
    return this.customer.name + "\n" + this.customer.address;
  }
}
```

This version of the Order class is better. The method PostalAddress uses the customer reference to obtain the postal address instead of inheriting the class Customer. This helps both the maintenance of the program and its concrete functionality.

Now if we need to change customer information, we don't have to change the order itself.

## Abstract classes

Sometimes, when planning a hierarchy of inheritance, there are cases when there exists a clear concept, but that concept is not a good candidate for an object in itself. The concept would be beneficial from the point of view of inheritance, since it includes variables and functionality that are shared by all the classes that would inherit it. On the other hand, you should not be able to create instances of the concept itself.

An abstract class combines interfaces and inheritance. You cannot create instances of them -- you can only create instances of derived classes of an abstract class. They can include normal methods which have a method body, but it's also possible to define abstract methods that only contain the method definition. Implementing the abstract methods is the responsibility of derived classes. Generally, abstract classes are used in situations where the concept that the class represents is not a clear independent concept. In such a case you shouldn't be able to create instances of it.

To define an abstract class or an abstract method the keyword abstract is used. An abstract class is defined with the phrase **public abstract class *NameOfClass***; an abstract method is defined by **public abstract returnType NameOfMethod**. Let's take a look at the following abstract class called **Operation**, which offers a structure for operations and executing them.

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  public abstract class Operation
  {

    public string name { get; }

    public Operation(string name)
    {
      this.name = name;
    }

    public abstract void Execute();
  }
}
```

The abstract class **Operation** works as a basis for implementing different actions. For instance, you can implement the plus operation by extending the **Operation** class in the following manner.

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  using System;
  public class PlusOperation : Operation
  {
    public PlusOperation() : base("PlusOperation")
    {
    }

    public override void Execute()
    {
      Console.Write("First number: ");
      int first = Convert.ToInt32(Console.ReadLine());
      Console.Write("Second number: ");
      int second = Convert.ToInt32(Console.ReadLine());

      Console.WriteLine("The sum of the numbers is " + (first + second));
    }
  }
}
```

Since all the classes that inherit from Operation have also the type **Operation**, we can create a user interface by using Operation type variables. Next we'll show the class **UserInterface** that contains a list of operations. It's possible to add operations to the UI dynamically.

```cpp
namespace Exercise001
{
  using System;
  using System.Collections.Generic;
  public class UserInterface
  {

    private List<Operation> operations;

    public UserInterface()
    {
      this.operations = new List<Operation>();
    }

    public void AddOperation(Operation operation)
    {
      this.operations.Add(operation);
    }

    public void Start()
    {
      while (true)
      {
        PrintOperations();
        Console.WriteLine("Choice: ");

        string choice = Console.ReadLine();
        if (choice == "0")
        {
          break;
        }

        ExecuteOperation(choice);
        Console.WriteLine();
      }
    }

    private void PrintOperations()
    {
      Console.WriteLine("\t0: Stop");
      int i = 0;
      while (i < this.operations.Count)
      {
        string operationName = this.operations[i].name;
        Console.WriteLine("\t" + (i + 1) + ": " + operationName);
        i = i + 1;
      }
    }

    private void ExecuteOperation(string choice)
    {
      int operation = Convert.ToInt32(choice);

      Operation chosen = this.operations[operation -1];
      chosen.Execute();
    }
  }
}
```

```cpp
UserInterface userInterface = new UserInterface();
userInterface.AddOperation(new PlusOperation());

userInterface.Start();
```

```console
        0: Stop
        1: PlusOperation
Choice:
> 1
First number: 4
Second number: 5
The sum of the numbers is 9

        0: Stop
        1: PlusOperation
Choice:
> 0
```

The greatest difference between interfaces and abstract classes is that abstract classes can contain object variables and constructors in addition to methods. Since you can also define functionality in abstract classes, you can use them to define e.g. default behavior. In the user interface above storing the name of the operation used the functionality defined in the abstract **Operation** class.

# Tehtävät

<Exercise title={'001 ABC'}>

Create the following three classes:

* Class A. Class should have no object variables nor should you specify a constructor for it. It only has the method **public void APrint()**, which prints a string "A".
* Class B. Class should have no object variables nor should you specify a constructor for it. It only has the method **public void BPrint()**, which prints a string "B".
* Class C. Class should have no object variables nor should you specify a constructor for it. It only has the method **public void CPrint()**, which prints a string "C".
* After you have created the classes, **modify them** so that class B inherits class A, and class C inherits class B. In other words, class A will be a base class for class B, and class B will be a base class for class C.

```cpp
A a = new A();
B b = new B();
C c = new C();

a.APrint();
b.BPrint();
c.CPrint();

Console.WriteLine();

c.APrint();
c.BPrint();
c.CPrint();
```

```console
A
B
C

A
B
C
```

</Exercise>

<Exercise title={'002 Person and Subclasses'}>

* Section 1

Create a class **Person**. The class must work as follows:

```cpp
Person ada = new Person("Ada Lovelace", "24 Maddox St. London W1S 2QN");
Person esko = new Person("Esko Ukkonen", "Mannerheimintie 15 00100 Helsinki");
Console.WriteLine(ada);
Console.WriteLine(esko);
```

```console
Ada Lovelace, 24 Maddox St. London W1S 2QN
Esko Ukkonen, Mannerheimintie 15 00100 Helsinki
```

* Section 2

Create a class **Student**, which inherits the class Person.

At creation, student has 0 study credits. Every time a student studies, amount of study credits goes up. Class must act as follows:

```cpp
Student ollie = new Student("Ollie", "6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028");
Console.WriteLine(ollie);
ollie.Study();
Console.WriteLine(ollie);
```

```console
Ollie, 6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028 credits: 0
Ollie, 6381 Hollywood Blvd. Los Angeles 90028 credits: 1
```

* Section 3

Create a class **Teacher**, which inherits the class Person.

The class must act as follows:

```cpp
Teacher ada = new Teacher("Ada Lovelace", "24 Maddox St. London W1S 2QN", 1200);
Teacher esko = new Teacher("Esko Ukkonen", "Mannerheimintie 15 00100 Helsinki", 5400);
Console.WriteLine(ada);
Console.WriteLine(esko);
```

```console
Ada Lovelace, 24 Maddox St. London W1S 2QN salary 1200 per month
Esko Ukkonen, Mannerheimintie 15 00100 Helsinki salary 5400 per month
```

<Note>
You have to override the ToString.
For Student and Teacher, use base.ToString() as a starting point.
</Note>

</Exercise>



<Exercise title={'003 Warehousing'}>

The exercise template contains a class **Warehouse**, which has the following properties, constructors and methods:

* public int balance - balance of the warehouse, i.e. the capacity which is taken up by the items in the warehouse.
* public int capacity - the total capacity of the warehouse (i.e. the one that was provided in the constructor).
* constructor public Warehouse(int capacity) - Creates an empty warehouse, which has the capacity provided as a parameter; an invalid capacity (<=0) creates a useless warehouse, with the the capacity 0.

* public int HowMuchSpaceLeft() - Returns a value telling how much space is left in the warehouse.
* public void AddToWarehouse(int amount) - Adds the desired amount to the warehouse; if the amount is negative, nothing changes, and if everything doesn't fit, then the warehouse is filled up and the rest is "thrown away" / "overflows".
* public int TakeFromWarehouse(int amount) - Take the desired amount from the warehouse. The method returns much we actually get. If the desired amount is negative, nothing changes and we return 0. If the desired amount is greater than the amount the warehouse contains, we get all there is to take and the warehouse is emptied.
* public override string ToString() - Returns the state of the object represented as a string like this 

```console
balance: 64, space left 16
``` 


In this exercise we build variations of a warehouse based on the Warehouse class.

* Section 1

The class **Warehouse** handles the functions related to the amount of a product. Now we want product name for the product and a way to handle the name. Let's write **ProductWarehouse** as a *derived class of Warehouse!* First, we'll just create a private object variable for the product name, and a constructor:

* public string productName
* public ProductWarehouse(string productName, int capacity) - Creates an empty product warehouse. The name of the product and the capacity of the warehouse are provided as parameters.
* public override string ToString() - Returns the state of the object represented as a string like in the example.

<Note>Remind yourself of how a constructor can use the constructor of the base class so you understand the existing code!</Note>

Example usage:

```cpp
ProductWarehouse juice = new ProductWarehouse("Juice", 1000);
juice.AddToWarehouse(1000);
juice.TakeFromWarehouse(11);
Console.WriteLine(juice.productName); // Juice
Console.WriteLine(juice);
```

```console
Juice
Juice: balance: 989, space left 11
```
* Section 2

Let's create a more informative warehouse. We want to know, if and how the balance of a product has changed. Let's first create a special tool for the change history, and create a class **ChangeHistory**:

* private List<int\> history
* constructor public ChangeHistory() 
* public void Add(int status) - adds provided status as the latest amount to remember in the change history.
* public void Clear() - empties the history
* public int MaxValue() - returns the largest value of the change history. If the history is empty, returns 0.
* public int MinValue() - returns the smallest value of the change history. If the history is empty, returns 0.
* public override string ToString() returns the following kind of string:

```console
Current: 500 Min: 0 Max: 1000
```

Where the first number is the current balance (the last index of the list), second number is the smallest number on the list, and last is the largest number on the list.

<Note>Use the methods MaxValue and MinValue in your ToString!</Note>

* Section 3

Implement **ProductWarehouseWithHistory** as a derived class of **ProductWarehouse**. In addition to all the previous fEatures this new warehouse also provides services related to the change history of the warehouse inventory. The history is managed using the **ChangeHistory** object.

Public constructors and methods:

* public ProductWarehouseWithHistory(string productName, int capacity, int initialBalance) creates a product warehouse. The product name, capacity, and initial balance are provided as parameters. Set the initial balance as the initial balance of the warehouse, as well as the first value of the change history.
* public string History() returns the product history like this:

```console
Current: 500 Min: 0 Max: 1000
``` 

Use the string representation of the ChangeHistory object as is.

* new public void AddToWarehouse(int amount) works just like the method in the Warehouse class, but we also record the changed state to the history. NOTICE: the value recorded in the history should be the warehouse's balance after adding, not the amount added!
* new public int TakeFromWarehouse(int amount) works just like the method in the Warehouse class, but we also record the changed state to the history. NOTICE: the value recorded in the history should be the warehouse's balance after removing, not the amount removed!


Here's one massive example:

```cpp
Warehouse wh = new Warehouse(100);
Console.WriteLine(wh);
wh.AddToWarehouse(10);
Console.WriteLine(wh);
wh.AddToWarehouse(100);
Console.WriteLine(wh);
wh.AddToWarehouse(-10);
Console.WriteLine(wh);
wh.TakeFromWarehouse(20);
Console.WriteLine(wh);
wh.TakeFromWarehouse(-20);
Console.WriteLine(wh);

Console.WriteLine();

ProductWarehouse juice = new ProductWarehouse("Juice", 1000);
juice.AddToWarehouse(1000);
juice.TakeFromWarehouse(11);
Console.WriteLine(juice.productName); // Juice
Console.WriteLine(juice);

Console.WriteLine();

ChangeHistory cs = new ChangeHistory();
cs.Add(100);
cs.Add(10);
cs.Add(200);
cs.Add(50);
Console.WriteLine(cs);

Console.WriteLine();

ProductWarehouseWithHistory milk = new ProductWarehouseWithHistory("Milk", 1000, 100);
Console.WriteLine(milk);
milk.TakeFromWarehouse(10);
Console.WriteLine(milk.History());
Console.WriteLine(milk);
milk.AddToWarehouse(100);
Console.WriteLine(milk.History());
Console.WriteLine(milk);
milk.TakeFromWarehouse(-10000);
Console.WriteLine(milk.History());
Console.WriteLine(milk);
```

```console
balance: 0, space left 100
balance: 10, space left 90
balance: 100, space left 0
balance: 100, space left 0
balance: 80, space left 20
balance: 80, space left 20

Juice
Juice: balance: 989, space left 11

Current: 50 Min: 10 Max: 200

Milk: balance: 100, space left 900
Current: 90 Min: 90 Max: 100
Milk: balance: 90, space left 910
Current: 190 Min: 90 Max: 190
Milk: balance: 190, space left 810
Current: 190 Min: 90 Max: 190
Milk: balance: 190, space left 810
```

</Exercise>

<Exercise title={'004 Different Boxes'}>

In the exercise template you'll find the classes **Item** and **Box**. Box is an abstract class, where adding multiple items is implemented by repeatedly calling the **Add-method**. The Add-method, meant for adding a single item, is abstract, so every class that inherits it, must implement it. Your assignment is to edit the Box-class and to implement different kinds of boxes based on the Box class.

* Section 1

Implement the **Equals** and **GetHashCode** methods for the Item-class. They are needed, so that you can use the contains-methods of different lists and collections. *Implement the methods in such a way that value of the weight instance variable of the Item-class isn't considered.*

* Section 2

Implement the class **BoxWithMaxWeight**, that inherits the Box class. BoxWithMaxWeight has a constructor public **BoxWithMaxWeight(int capacity)**, that defines the max weight allowed for that box. You can add an item to a BoxWithMaxWeight when and only when, adding the item won't cause the boxes max weight capacity to be exceeded.

Next implement the class **OneItemBox**, that inherits the Box class. OneItemBox has constructor the **public OneItemBox()**, and it has the capacity of exactly one item. If there is already an item in the box, it must not be switched. The weight of the item added to the box is irrelevant.

Next implement the class **MisplacingBox**, that inherits the Box-class. MisplacingBox has a constructor **public MisplacingBox()**. You can add any items to misplacing box, but items can never be found when looked for. In other words adding to the box must always succeed, but calling the method IsInbox must always return false.

Here's some code for testing them all:

```cpp
BoxWithMaxWeight coffeeBox = new BoxWithMaxWeight(10);
coffeeBox.Add(new Item("Saludo", 5));
coffeeBox.Add(new Item("Pirkka", 5));
coffeeBox.Add(new Item("Kopi Luwak", 5));

Console.WriteLine(coffeeBox.IsInBox(new Item("Saludo")));
Console.WriteLine(coffeeBox.IsInBox(new Item("Pirkka")));
Console.WriteLine(coffeeBox.IsInBox(new Item("Kopi Luwak")));

OneItemBox box = new OneItemBox();
box.Add(new Item("Saludo", 5));
box.Add(new Item("Pirkka", 5));

Console.WriteLine(box.IsInBox(new Item("Saludo")));
Console.WriteLine(box.IsInBox(new Item("Pirkka")));

MisplacingBox mbox = new MisplacingBox();
Console.WriteLine(mbox.IsInBox(new Item("Saludo")));
Console.WriteLine(mbox.IsInBox(new Item("Pirkka")));
```

```console
True
True
False
True
False
False
False
```

</Exercise>